Choosing randomization unit post (#13)
ian-whitestone/ian-whitestone.github.io: _posts/2021-01-31-choosing-randomization-unit.md

---
layout: post
title: Choosing your randomization unit in online A/B tests
author: ianwhitestone

> summary: A discussion around the implications of different randomization units in online controlled experiments

Author: "A discussion around the implications of session versus user level randomization in online controlled experiments"

☝️ switch to this if you drop the stuff around metrics

comments: true
image: images/zappa-serverless-docker/main.png
---

{% include head.html %}

> Despite being considered the gold standard approach for determining the true effect of a change, there are still many statistical traps & biases that can spring up when A/B tests are not set up correctly. This post will discuss some of the nuances you must consider when setting up your A/B test. In particular, the randomization unit you choose, and the corresponding metrics.

Author: ```suggestion
Despite being considered the gold standard approach for determining the true effect of a change, there are still many statistical traps & biases that can spring up when A/B tests are not set up correctly. This post will discuss some of the nuances you must consider when choosing a randomization unit for your A/B test.
```

if you drop metrics stuff. even if you don't, consider combining the two sentences.

</p>

In the realm of web applications, three common ways of doing this are:

- **Page views**: for each page that is rendered (shown to a person), randomly choose to use version A or version B for that particular page.
- **Sessions**: sessions are just a grouping of page views made by the same person, typically bound by a specific time period. In session level randomization, we'll randomly choose to use version A or version B of the site for all page views in a given session.
- **Users:** users are people, or a close approximation of them. If a user must log into your application, you can easily identify them with something like an account id. For most websites, you don't need to log in, so users are instead identified using [cookies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTTP_cookie). Because a single person could clear their cookies, or use a different device or browser, and therefore get assigned a new cookie, these will only serve as an approximation. In user level randomization, we can randomly choose whether to show version A or version B to a particular "user" across all their sessions and page views.

> These are all examples of different **randomization units**. A randomization unit is the "who" or "what" that is randomly allocated to each group. Your choice of randomization unit will depend on multiple things. Technical feasibility will often be a limiting factor - do you have reliable ways of identifying sessions & users? The type of change you are making will also influence your choice. Are you testing out a new page layout and trying to see if it causes users to remain on a page for a longer period of time? Page view level randomization could be a good candidate in this case. What if you are testing out an entirely different color scheme for your site and seeing how it impacts your account signup rate? A different colour appearing on each page view could be a pretty jarring experience for users, so session or user level randomization would likely be a better choice in order to provide a consistent experience.

Author: ```suggestion
These are all examples of different **randomization units**. A randomization unit is the "who" or "what" that is randomly allocated to each group. Your choice of randomization unit will depend on multiple things. Technical feasibility will often be a limiting factor - do you have reliable ways of identifying sessions & users? The type of change you are making will also influence your choice. Are you testing out a new page layout and trying to see if it causes users to remain on a page for a longer period of time? Page view level randomization could be a good candidate in this case. What if you are testing out an entirely different color scheme for your site and seeing how it impacts your account signup rate? A different colour appearing on each page view could be a pretty jarring experience for users, so session or user level randomization would likely be a better choice in order to provide a consistent experience. 

Your decision of randomization unit may also be influenced by the size of the effect you are trying to calculate and the available sample size. Choosing a more narrow grain like page views can give you more statistical power since you'll typically get a significantly larger sample size when randomizing at this level.
```

> Going forward I'll focus on the implications with choosing session versus user level randomization, but note that the same concepts would apply when choosing between session and page view level randomization.

Author: should you mention that this post will just discuss one aspect that should influence your choice, and not all the other factors you listed above?

## User level randomization

Randomizing on the user instead of the session can help us deal with these non-independent sessions. In order to avoid the same pitfalls we faced with session level randomization, we must assume that the users themselves are independent, and do not influence one another's decision to convert <sup><a href="#notes">2</a></sup>. Using our faithful shoppers Terry & Jerry, user level randomization would look something like this:

<p align="center">
    <img width="100%" src="{{ site.baseurl }}{% link images/choosing-randomization-unit/user_level_split.png %}">
</p>

We can see that each user is consistently assigned to the same experience across all their sessions. After re-running our simulation with user level randomization, and the same "carryover effects" from before, we recover the results we originally expected:

* The A/B test correctly detects a positive effect 100.0% of the time (at a 95% "confidence" level)
* The A/B test detects an effect size of 199 bps (~2%) on average

> 

Author: Could create another diagram that looks something like two bubbles - test & control - with all their individual units (sessions) and show how some sessions between the two groups are linked with lines.

# Choosing your metrics

- Now that we've seen the impact of "carryover effects" or nonindependence of sessions, we should talk about metrics
- In the section above I just looked at session level conversion rate, as this metric is often used due to its simplicity. But where could it lead us astray?
- What happens if the underlying session conversion rate stayed the same, but session per user increased for treatment?
    - session conversion rate would actually look smaller
- Throughout this post, I've assumed that session conversion rate and sessions per user were independent. As discussed in this great post: https://towardsdatascience.com/the-second-ghost-of-experimentation-the-fallacy-of-session-based-metrics-fb65006d30ff, that is usually not the case. Instead, you will typically see something like:
    - show two curves
    - now demonstrate higher false positive rate with user level randomization + session level conversion
    - show how this returns to normal with 

# Wrapping up...

> 

Author: summarize what this post looked at: implications of SUTVA in online experiments

If you think your sessions may not be independent and there could be some "carryover" effect, you should randomize at the user grain instead.

- Example of when this may be the case: product recommendations!
    - Implications: we underestimate the true effect or even miss detecting it all together
    - Same can happen with a treatment that has a negative effect, which gets masked by some users returning to the "control" or better experience, but carrying that negative impact with them.
- Also make sure you look at the distribution of sessions per user. If most users visit close to once, on average, then this will be much less of an issue.
- Of course, it's difficult to know what the true carryover effect would be, but if you think there is a good chance of some nonindependence existing, and you have the bability to do user level, you should take that option whenever possible to reduce your

> 

Author: re-mention all the other things that should be considered when choosing your randomization grain?
